we are at switzerland's second largest
glacier
system called gorna glacier it's a
glacier that
produces ice very high right there next
to the peak that we see over there which
is
the highest peak in switzerland called
the dufour spitzer this picture is quite
nice
because it shows you a before after
image
this is from the 1870s so
about when the little ice age was was
ending so really the
uh the last extent from where we see all
these lateral moraines
this is in 2006 and you see
right now how it is in 2019. so you can
see that
150 years ago where we were
there was ice flowing down right here
from the
from the central glacier the monterosa
glacier
and it was still attached to the glacier
down there
uh what we studied here in particular
was the drainage of an
ice marginal lake this is a typical
phenomenon which you basically have
everywhere in the world where you have
glaciers
that melt and um the problem is that you
have
a water body which is at least partially
damped
by an ice body and these
these ice dams are inherently unstable
ice is not a very reliable damning
material
and so regularly these these lakes
outburst they find find a way through
the ice or they can break the ice dam
and they produce floods in downstream
communities so the name is yokohalop
which is yokohalop which is the
icelandic
is it's an icelandic term yokol you may
have heard this that's glacier like
ayatollah yoko
and you actually it's a you have an l an
h
and an l and an icelandic person once
told me you
pronounce every single letter so you
really do say yoko halop
and the jalap means sprint so it means
glacial springs and you can see the
evolution of these lake basins right
here
so we're standing somewhere right here
this is the glacier over there and you
can see how as the glacier surface was
lowering you were starting to get this
depression right here which was then
filled with the lake water and these
lakes start draining
when the lake water is capable of
accessing the subglacial drainage system
so you can imagine it below these ice
tongues
in the summer you have very large
channels they can be
two meters in diameter and these
channels are very efficient so as soon
as
water or lake water is pressed through
them they also widen
because as water flows along the ice
walls
there's friction that's dissipated and
this friction
increases the diameters very rapidly
flow of water through ice wall channels
is actually a very interesting problem
the hydraulic engineers they're familiar
with
water flow through pipes but they
usually calculate water flow
through metal pipes or concrete pipes
which don't erode for glaciers you have
the interesting case
where the water is the same material as
the channel walls it's just the solid
state but of course what can happen is
the water can melt the pipe make it
bigger and the smell water contributes
then to the flux
it can also freeze to the walls which
makes the walls shrink
so it's actually a quite mathematical
problem
but the glacier doesn't always do the
textbook example
of course you can also have a lot of
times crevasses
which somehow route the water and
glacially
to a moola which you see right here and
then to the subglacial drainage system
and what you can also have and this is
what everybody is afraid of
is if you have lots of crevasses right
here and this
entire part starts floating up so you
have an iceberg calving event
and this is a matter of seconds or a
minute
and then all of a sudden you have a huge
connection and this
these are the most dangerous drainages
that happen in the valley next door
in the 1960s there was a glacier
in a steep topography step just like
this one right here
and uh there was a construction site
underneath the glacier
and then uh all of a sudden the tongue
collapsed
it killed 88 construction workers which
were completely surprised
a lot of research was initiated of
course to understand this event and it
was noticed that
it's not uncommon even for steep
glaciers to speed up when there's a lot
of melt
but if the drainage system is
unfavorable when it cannot
evacuate enough melt then too much
pressure builds up and
the whole thing goes in general you see
the glaciers are receding
in switzerland the parts of the glacier
that gain mass
are smaller and smaller and the parts
of the glacier that melt over average
over a year
are bigger and bigger this plot which is
the mass balance
in the winter so how much mass is gained
the mass balance in the summer which is
red
and the whole the the whole balance so
one
minus the other you can also see that
it's been the annual mass balance here
the green bars they're con
consistently negative for almost all
years
but what you can also see it's really
the summer balance the negative summer
balance that's
picking up right here it's not that the
glaciers
don't get as much mass in the winter
anymore here
in the alps it's really the summers that
really hit the glaciers this is really
what's kind of the daily bread of
glaciology you take a pole
and you drill it into the ice maybe 10
centimeters or a bit more
and then you can come back regularly and
see where the ice surface is so when you
drilled it in for example the ice
surface was here
then you come back two weeks later the
ice surface is here
and so on then you come back in the
winter the snow first
surface is up here and this is what
glaciologists use to
uh to to measure the specific mass
balance so the mass balance that's very
specific to
a a certain location and then you
produce these plots
you have the accumulation in the dotted
line right here
which in the winter increases rapidly
you get lots and lots of snow and then
in the summer
you stop or you get very lit very little
snow
at the same time you get almost no melt
in the winter
and then towards the spring the melt
picks up right here
and then once we get it to fall the melt
slows down again and
the balance the entire balance is simply
the algebraic sum of the two which is
the solid line right here
so if you look at the solid line this
right here is the total ablation the
mass loss this is the total accumulation
the mass gain
then you know where you are on the
glacier does anyone can anyone say
are you in the ablation zone or the
accumulation zone
accumulation yes because you have a
positive mass balance at the end of the
year so you're in the accumulation zone
there are several concerns one is that
um
the glaciers are really helping us these
days because
when we have a very dry and hot period
in the summer
without lots of rain that means that the
the rivers carry less water and the
glaciers in this moment
they melt uh so they kind of make up for
the
lack of of water due to rain
and and so this is this is a damping
factor um
in the future when we have less glaciers
or when
basic glacial basins start to be ice
free we don't have the stamping effect
and
and this means that when we have
precipitation we have lots of water
when we have no precipitation when there
is a drought
we have little water and this uh this is
something that's certainly of concern
for
water management this shows you how this
runoff will change
this is a small glacier in uh
in france the solid line the solid black
line
right here shows you um how the runoff
from this glacier so the entire melt on
the glacier
was in a reference period 1980 till 2009
you see what you expect in august when
it's the hottest
all the snows the protective snow is
gone that's when you really get the high
melt rates and now what happens if
things keep going like this
if the glaciers get smaller of course
this will change
and the red line right here shows you
the projections
for the year 2070 to 2099
and you see that first of all we have
less runoff the run of peaks are lower
they're projected to be lower by around
10 percent annually in the summer
perhaps even by almost a third
but what you can also see is the runoff
peak occurs
earlier in the year and this is
easy to understand because the glaciers
when we have a dry hot summer
the glaciers are very useful they melt
they give us water in the rivers
when there's absolutely no precipitation
when the glaciers are gone
then we don't have this effect anymore
this entire area is
then how much we will lack how much
water
but this area right here also tells you
how much water we will get at a point
when
before we didn't have as much water and
so the idea is can we somehow
take this water which we've been able to
do without in history
and just make it release
to the valleys a little bit later and
the way you would do this is by
constructing dams
of course and it turns out that you
cannot mitigate this entire
uh difference but perhaps around
two-thirds of it
and this would require the constructions
of
half a dozen to a dozen dams uh
which is obviously something that um the
governments right now are
seriously considering because it's it's
a lot of water that
in the later summer will eventually be
missing and we have to do something
about it
i can't imagine any more fulfilling work
honestly if you're in a place like this
you see nature you it's it's almost a
spiritual experience for me
you see how humans are really part of
nature
nature is in the end it's much more
powerful than
[Music]
we as humans are and of course when you
see how much
these glaciers have melted in the recent
years or decades
it's a reminder that we need to take
better care of our planet
you